Copy-and-Patch Compilation
A fast compilation algorithm for high-level languages and bytecode
HAORAN XU, Stanford University, USA, haoranxu@stanford.edu
FREDRIK KJOLSTAD, Stanford University, USA, kjolstad@cs.stanford.edu
Fast compilation is important when compilation occurs at runtime, such as query compilers in modern database
systems and WebAssembly virtual machines in modern browsers. We present copy-and-patch, an extremely
fast compilation technique that also produces good quality code. It is capable of lowering both high-level
languages and low-level bytecode programs to binary code, by stitching together code from a large library
of binary implementation variants. We call these binary implementations stencils because they have holes
where missing values must be inserted during code generation. We show how to construct a stencil library
and describe the copy-and-patch algorithm that generates optimized binary code.
We demonstrate two use cases of copy-and-patch: a compiler for a high-level C-like language intended
for metaprogramming and a compiler for WebAssembly. Our high-level language compiler has negligible
compilation cost: it produces code from an AST in less time than it takes to construct the AST. We have
implemented an SQL database query compiler on top of this metaprogramming system and show that on
TPC-H database benchmarks, copy-and-patch generates code two orders of magnitude faster than LLVM -O0
and three orders of magnitude faster than higher optimization levels. The generated code runs an order of
magnitude faster than interpretation and 14% faster than LLVM -O0. Our WebAssembly compiler generates
code 4.9×–6.5× faster than Liftoff, the WebAssembly baseline compiler in Google Chrome. The generated
code also outperforms Liftoff’s by 39%–63% on the Coremark and PolyBenchC WebAssembly benchmarks.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Just-in-time compilers; Domain specific languages.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Fast Compilation, Binary Code Variant Library, Binary Code Patching
1 INTRODUCTION
Fast compilation is important, particularly when the compilation occurs at runtime. Two representative use cases of runtime compilation are the WebAssembly virtual machines in modern browsers
and the query engines of modern SQL databases, where WebAssembly modules and SQL queries
are compiled to executable code and then executed. Since the latency experienced by the user is
the sum of the time to generate the code (startup delay) and the time to execute the generated
code, it is not enough to simply use the most optimizing but slowest compiler. The system must
instead balance startup delay with execution performance. As an example, the TurboFan optimizing
compiler [Backes 2018] in the Google Chrome browser needs 49 CPU seconds to compile the
WebAssembly module that powers the online AutoCAD Web App [AutoCAD 2018] on our system,
which is too long for users to wait. As another example, the MemSQL [MemSQL 2020a] database
takes up to 4.5 seconds to compile a TPC-H [TPC 2020] database benchmark query using LLVM
-O3 on our system. And business-intelligence software may generate complex queries that take
minutes to compile [MemSQL 2020c].
To balance startup delay and execution performance, runtime execution environment typically
contain several execution tiers that occupy different points on the startup delay–execution performance Pareto frontier. Typical choices include interpreters, baseline compilers (also called template
JITs), and choices of different optimizing levels for an optimizing compiler (e.g., LLVM -O0, -O1,
-O2, and -O3). Modern databases, including Hyper [Neumann 2011], Peloton [Menon et al. 2017],
PostgreSQL [PostgresSQL 2020], and MemSQL [MemSQL 2020a], all employ tiered execution strategies that adds an interpreter, LLVM -O0, or both below the most optimizing LLVM -O3 tier. Web
browsers, on the other hand, use dedicated baseline compilers instead of interpretation or the -O0
version of an optimizing compiler. For example, the Google Chrome WebAssembly virtual machine
1
arXiv:2011.13127v3 [cs.PL] 15 Sep 2021
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
first compiles using the fast Liftoff baseline compiler [Backes 2018] and then recompiles in the
background using the optimizing TurboFan compiler. The motivation for using dedicated baseline
compilers over -O0 compilation with optimizing compilers is startup delay. Baseline compilers such
as Liftoff translate bytecode to machine code in one pass, without going through the intermediate
representations of an optimizing compiler. As they move through the bytecode stream, they inspect
each bytecode and emit appropriate machine code, either using a platform-dependent assembler as
in Liftoff or pre-compiled from a high-level language like C or Java [Ertl and Gregg 2003; Iliasov
2003; Piumarta and Riccardi 1998; Wimmer et al. 2013]. Thus, baseline compilers offer faster compilation than the -O0 compilation of an optimizing compiler—often measured in tens of megabytes of
code generated per second—as well as better execution performance than an interpreter.
Bytecode
full compilation
use case:
metaprogramming
Machine Code
High-Level Language
assembly
use case:
WebAssembly
linearization
Fig. 1. Phases of compilation: linearization,
assembly, and full compilation.
Interestingly, according to our survey of the 15 codegenerating databases enumerated by Pavlo [2021], not
a single database has implemented a dedicated baseline
compiler. This is not a coincidence. Database query compilers need to express the generated logic in a high-level
metaprogramming language for expressiveness. And writing a baseline compiler to efficiently translate a high-level
language with many complex language features directly
to executable code is far more challenging than doing so
for bytecode, where the input has already been processed
into a stream of low-level opcodes that map closely to machine instruction. We therefore categorize compilers into
full compilers that compile from a high-level language to
machine code and bytecode assemblers that assemble a
linearized stream of low-level bytecode to machine code, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In this paper, we propose a new algorithm for template-JIT-style baseline compilers called copyand-patch. Unlike prior baseline compiler techniques, copy-and-patch can be used to create both
full compilers and bytecode assemblers. In addition, it shifts the startup delay–execution performance
Pareto frontier by a large margin in both worlds.
In the world of bytecode assemblers, we implemented a WebAssembly compiler based on copyand-patch. Our compiler achieves both lower startup delay and better execution performance than
prior baseline compilers. Figure 2 shows the performance of six WebAssembly compilers on the
PolyBenchC benchmark [Louis-Noel Pouchet 2011], normalized to our performance. Our compiler
has 6.5× lower startup delay than Liftoff, while generating on average 63% better-performing code.
In addition to Liftoff, our compiler also displaces Wasmer SinglePass [Zhou 2018], the baseline
compiler used in Wasmer [Akbary et al. 2018], and even Wasmer Cranelift [Akbary 2018], a
relatively slow optimizing compiler, from the Pareto frontier.
In the world of full compilers, we used copy-and-patch to implement a compiler for a C-like highlevel language intended for metaprogramming. The language is implemented as a DSL embedded
in C++. To demonstrate that one can get a full compiler for a powerful language from copy-andpatch with reasonable efforts, our language supports a variety of complex features, including
the C typesystem, all major C language constructs, the ability to use C++ classes and call C++
functions/methods in the host code, C++ exceptions semantics and destructor semantics, and
so on. We then built a simple SQL database query compiler on top of this metaprogramming
system. To the best of our knowledge, this implementation is the first database query compiler
equipped with a dedicated baseline compiler. We evaluated its performance on eight TPC-H database
queries [TPC 2020]. Figure 3 shows the Pareto frontier of one of them. The compilation time of
our compiler is so low that it is less than the time it takes to construct the AST of the program.
2
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
!"#$%&'()*+,-)./0'"1+2'$)
!"#$%&'()*+30%#0/4+2'$)+5&"67
89:
:98
:898
:8898
:88898
898 89; :98 :9;
V8 Turbofan
V8 Liftoff
Wasmer Cranelift
WAVM LLVM
Wasmtime Cranelift
Wasmer Singlepass
Copy-and-Patch
Pareto frontier
Baseline Compilers
Optimizing Compilers
Fig. 2. A scatter plot of normalized startup delay
against execution time for seven WebAssembly compilers averaged over the PolyBench benchmarks. Our
copy-and-patch compiler replaces baseline compilers
on the Pareto frontier.
!"#$%&'()*+,-)./0'"1+2'$)
!"#$%&'()*+30%#0/4+2'$)+5&"67
8
9
98
988
9:888
8 9 ; < = > ? @ A B
Interpreter
LLVM -O2
LLVM -O1
LLVM -O0
Copy-and-Patch
Fig. 3. A scatter plot of normalized startup execution
times against execution times for five strategies for
executing the sixth TPC-H query implemented in a
high-level language. Our copy-and-patch compiler
replaces LLVM -O0 on the Pareto frontier.
Compared with interpreters, both have negligible startup delay (since constructing ASTs takes
longer), but our execution performance is an order of magnitude faster. Compared with LLVM -O0,
our implementation compiles two orders of magnitude faster and generates code that performs
on average 14% better. Therefore, we conclude that copy-and-patch renders both interpreters and
LLVM -O0 compilation obsolete in this use case.
At a high level, copy-and-patch works by having a pre-built library of composable and parametrizable binary code snippets that we call binary stencils.1 At runtime, optimization and code generation
become the simple task of looking up a data table to select the appropriate stencil, and instantiate
it to the desired position by copying it and patching in the missing values. Our contributions are:
(1) The concept of a binary stencil, which is a pre-built implementation of an AST node or
bytecode opcode with missing values (immediate literals, stack variable offsets, and branch
and call targets) to be patched in at runtime.
(2) An algorithm that uses a library with many binary stencil variants to emit optimized machine
code. There are two types of variants: one that enumerates different parameter configurations
(whether they are literals, in different registers, or on the stack) and one that enumerates
different code patterns (a single AST node/bytecode or a supernode of a common AST
subtree/bytecode sequence).
(3) An algorithm that linearizes high-level language constructs like if-statements and loops, and
generates machine code by composing multiple binary stencil fragments.
(4) A system called MetaVar for generating binary stencils, which allows the user to systematically generate the binary stencil variants in clean and pure C++, and leverages the
Clang+LLVM compiler infrastructure to hide all platform-specific low-level detail.
We evaluate our algorithm by evaluating the copy-and-patch-based compilers we built for WebAssembly and our high-level language.2 We compare the WebAssembly compiler to six industrial
WebAssembly compilers, including those from Google Chrome and Wasmer. Our results show
that our algorithm replaces all prior baseline compilers on the Pareto frontier and moves first-tier
compilation closer to the performance of optimizing compilers. And we compare the high-level
language compiler based on copy-and-patch with compiler implementations based on LLVM using
1The WebAssembly compiler uses 1666 stencils taking 35 kB and the high-level compiler uses 98,831 stencils taking 17.5 MB.
2Both compilers are open source under permissive licenses (MIT and Apache). The high-level language compiler is maintained
at https://github.com/sillycross/PochiVM as part of a larger metaprogramming system project. The WebAssembly compiler
is maintained at https://github.com/sillycross/WasmNow.
3
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
Stencil Library
(Section 3) Bytecode/AST
Stencil
Generators
Copy-and-Patch
(Section 4)
MetaVar
(Section 5)
Binary
code
Fig. 4. The copy-and-patch system compiles a high-level language AST or a bytecode sequence to binary
code. It consists of the MetaVar compiler, which compiles stencil generators to binary stencils, and the
Copy-and-Patch code generator, which generates the executable code for an AST or a bytecode sequence by
copying and patching stencils.
different optimization levels, showing that our technique compiles two orders of magnitude faster
than LLVM -O0 while producing better code. We also show a breakdown of the performance
contributed by different features in our compiler.
2 OVERVIEW
The topic of our paper is the copy-and-patch compilation algorithm and the associated MetaVar
compiler. But to motivate their use and to evaluate them, we also built two compilers: one for
WebAssembly and one for a high-level language. In this section, we first give an overview of the
copy-and-patch algorithm and its surrounding ecosystem of tools and then give an overview of the
two compilers.
2.1 Copy-and-Patch and MetaVar Systems
The copy-and-patch system consists of two components: the MetaVar compiler and the copy-andpatch code generator. Figure 4 shows their relationship. The key to the copy-and-patch algorithm is
the concept of a binary stencil, which is a partial binary implementation of a bytecode instruction
or an AST node of a high-level language. The MetaVar compiler generates many binary stencils
that implement different optimization cases for every bytecode or AST node. The MetaVar compiler
takes as input bytecode/AST stencil generators and produces a library of binary stencils at library
installation time. The stencil library becomes an input to the copy-and-patch code generator,
together with a bytecode sequence or an AST that implements a function. The code generator then
produces binary code that implements the function, by copying and patching together stencils that
implement the bytecodes or AST nodes. The patching step rewrites pre-determined places in the
binary code, which are operands of machine instructions, including jump addresses and values of
constants (stack offsets and literal values). Despite patching binary code, however, the system does
not need any knowledge of platform-specific machine instruction encoding and is thus portable.
There are many stencil variants for each bytecode/AST node, and the copy-and-patch code
generator produces optimized code by selecting among these variants. For example, if the AST
contains an addition with a constant, then copy-and-patch will choose a variant that adds to a
literal and then patch in the literal value. It will also perform register allocation by choosing among
stencils that operate on values in registers and ones that operate on values on the stack, depending
on register availability. And as a final example, the copy-and-patch algorithm will place the stencils
of operators that follow each other in consecutive locations in memory, which lets it remove the
jump between them. Together, these and other optimizations by stencil variant selection produces
code that outperforms an interpreter, a bytecode baseline compiler, and even LLVM -O0.
4
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
Tier 1: Copy-and-Patch Tier 2: Optimizing Compiler
WebAssembly Bytecode
Clang with WebAssembly Backend
Applications
Client Browser
Development Environment
Fig. 5. Copy-and-Patch can be used by WebAssembly compilers in browsers to both speed up Tier 1
compilation and produce better code. And it can be
combined with a Tier 2 optimizing compiler to recompile hot code when the increased performance can
amortize the orders of magnitude slower compilation.
Applications, Query Compilers, and DSL Libraries
Metaprogramming API
Copy-and-Patch Backend LLVM Backend
Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)
Fig. 6. Copy-and-Patch can be used by metaprogramming systems to speed up their interpreters
past LLVM -O0. And it can be combined with LLVM
to let the user request higher optimization levels
when the increased performance can amortize the
orders of magnitude higher compilation cost.
2.2 Use case: WebAssembly Compiler
WebAssembly is a bytecode format designed as a portable compilation target for programming
languages, with the goal of enabling untrusted code to be executed safely and efficiently on
any platform. Since WebAssembly code cannot be executed directly and an interpreter is too
slow [Backes 2018], it must be assembled to machine code at runtime before it can execute.
WebAssembly modules can often be large. For example, the AutoCAD Web App [AutoCAD
2018] is powered by a WebAssembly module of 47.5 MB; and clang.wasm [Smith 2018], the clang
compiler in WebAssembly, is 30.5 MB. Since the user cannot interact with an application until the
code starts executing, a fast baseline compiler is critical for a good user experience. As such, major
web browsers like Chrome, Firefox, and Safari and major non-web WebAssembly runtimes like
Wasmer and Wasmtime provide baseline compilers for WebAssembly, which prioritize a low startup
delay at the expense of lower execution performance [Backes 2018; Bastien et al. 2017; Clark 2018;
Gohman 2018; Wingo 2020; Zhou 2018]. On the other hand, performance is also important, since
the major selling point of WebAssembly is that it lets native applications run at near-native speed
on the Web, and the code generated by the baseline compiler will be executed until the optimizing
compiler finishes, which can take a long time. The need for both extremely fast compilation and
good execution performance makes WebAssembly a representative use case for copy-and-patch.
We implemented a WebAssembly baseline compiler using copy-and-patch. Figure 5 shows its role
in replacing the Tier 1 baseline compiler in a web browser, for both lower startup delay and better
execution performance. Our compiler supports the full WebAssembly 1.0 core specification [Group
2017], as well as a subset of the WASI embedding [Group 2018] necessary to run the benchmarks
in Section 6. We note that an embedding only defines an agreement on how the imported functions
of a WebAssembly module shall be implemented, so supporting more embeddings has nothing to
do with code generation.
2.3 Use case: High-Level Language Compiler
Our second use case for copy-and-patch is a metaprogramming language embedded in a C++ library
that can be used to generate code at runtime. Example uses include database query engines and DSL
libraries. Since a database query engine is expected to provide low latency, a metaprogramming
system serving them must provide an execution path with low startup latency in addition to an
optimizing path. In the database world the optimizing path is typically LLVM -O3, and the low
startup latency path is either an interpreter or LLVM -O0. Figure 6 shows the role of copy-and-patch
5
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
in such a metaprogramming system. Copy-and-Patch provides better execution performance than
LLVM -O0 at a negligible startup delay similar to an interpreter, thus rendering both interpreters
and LLVM -O0 obsolete in this use case. The user of this metaprogramming system can either use
copy-and-patch or compile with LLVM -O1 or higher at a much higher compilation time.
We have developed a compiler that implements the copy-and-patch code generation technique
for the high-level metaprogramming language. It supports all major imperative language constructs,
local C++ objects, the ability to call external C++ functions, and C++ exceptions. Furthermore,
users can expand the library with their own AST nodes, which is useful when a construct can
not be implemented in the language and an external function call is too slow. For example, we
provide an addition expression with C overflow semantics. But a user implementing a database
query compiler might need an addition expression with SQL overflow semantics, implemented with
low-level compiler intrinsics. Although the techniques we describe stand on their own, we believe
our implementation can be used directly by metaprogramming systems such as Julia [Bezanson
et al. 2017], Halide [Ragan-Kelley et al. 2012], TACO [Kjolstad et al. 2017], Hyper [Neumann 2011],
Peloton [Pavlo et al. 2017], and Terra [DeVito et al. 2013].
3 THE STENCIL LIBRARY
The stencil library contains binary implementations of bytecode or AST node types that are stitched
together at runtime by the copy-and-patch algorithm to generate code for a bytecode module or a
function in a high-level language. We call the binary implementations stencils, because they have
holes where copy-and-patch inserts missing values to specialize them for the specific runtime AST.
The stencil library contains many stencil variants for each bytecode or AST node type that are
specialized for different operand types, value locations, and more. The variants let copy-and-patch
optimize the generated code and do simple register allocation. Since the configuration options
compose as a Cartesian product, the stencil library can grow to a significant number of stencils.
Our WebAssembly implementation contains 1666 stencils, taking 35 kB of memory. Our high-level
language implementation is larger because it includes many supernodes and contains 98,831 stencils,
taking 17.5 MB of memory. Although we believe these library sizes are practical for our respective
use cases, there are too many stencils for it to be practical to write them by hand.
A binary stencil is a binary code function that implements a computation logic fragment, where
literals, jump addresses, and stack offsets are missing. Each computation logic fragment implements
the semantics of one AST node or bytecode, or a commonly-used shape of an AST subtree or
bytecode sequence (we call such stencils supernodes). Supernodes allow optimizations across node
boundaries, resulting in better quality of generated machine instructions. During copy-and-patch
code generation, as we describe in Section 4, the runtime AST or bytecode sequence are patternmatched to stencils and supernode stencils. The selected stencils are copied and the missing values
inserted. For example, if an instruction uses a literal then the value is filled in, and if it has a branch
instruction to the next operation then the address is inserted.
(a + b) == c
Fig. 7. CPS
The binary stencils use continuation-passing style (CPS) [Steele 1977]
to pass control to the next stencil. With continuation-passing, control
is passed directly to the next operation instead of being returned to
the parent operation. Figure 7 shows how continuation-passing control
flow moves bottom-up through an expression. Since function calls to
pass on control are tail calls, the Clang C++ compiler that the MetaVar system uses to compile
stencils lowers them to jump instructions. Combined with the GHC calling convention [GHC and
LLVM 2020], in which all registers are saved by the caller and all parameters are passed in registers,
continuation-passing removes most of the calling overhead between stencils.
6
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
Register allocation is another important optimization required for fast binary code. The obvious
way to pass a temporary value between stencils is to reserve a slot in the stack frame whose
offset is represented by a stencil hole. However, this is suboptimal in term of performance (since
each read/write is a memory access), and we want to allow temporary values to be passed around
in CPU registers. The trick to accomplish this also lies in the GHC calling convention, where
all function parameters are passed in registers. Therefore, to pass a value as a parameter to the
continuation is to pass this value in register to another stencil. In other words, we repurpose the
function prototype and the calling convention as a register allocation protocol, where each function
parameter implicitly corresponds to some physical register determined by the calling convention.
We generate different variants of stencils with different function prototypes for different register
configurations, so that at runtime we can pick the right one based on the circumstance.
void stencil1(uintptr_t stack) {
 int x = /* assign value to x */;
 (void(*)(uintptr_t, int) )(stack, x);
}
void stencil2(uintptr_t stack, uint64_t x) {
 // computation unrelated to x
 (void(*)(uintptr_t, uint64_t) )(stack, x);
}
void stencil3(uintptr_t stack, int x) {
 // do something with x
}
Fig. 8. Three stencils that are executed in the
order of the arrows. The first stencil produces
a temporary value x that we want to pass in a
register to the third stencil. The second stencil
is executed in between, so it must not clobber
the register. This is achieved by the pass-through
parameter in the second stencil.
We cannot naively enumerate all possible combinations of function prototypes for the different
types of values that may be passed through, since
the total number of combinations grows exponentially. The crucial observation is that each stencil
only cares about its own inputs. The contents stored
in the other registers do not matter, as long as they
are not clobbered by the stencil. Therefore, for those
registers, it is sufficient to always represent it by
the longest type (uint64_t or double), and pass it
from the argument to the continuation verbatim. We
demonstrate this with a concrete example as shown
in Figure 8. In this example, we have three stencils.
Stencil 1 produces a temporary value x of type int,
which is to be consumed by stencil 3. But stencil 2 is
executed in between, so it must be instructed to not
clobber the register holding the value. As shown in
the figure, stencil 1 calls its continuation with the
temporary value x as a new parameter. This puts the
value in the register. Stencil 2 does not care about
what is stored in the register, but it must not clobber it. This is achieved by having x passed
directly from the parameter to its continuation: we call it a pass-through parameter. There are two
points worth mentioning. First, despite that the true type of x is int, the type of the pass-through
parameter is uint64_t. This prevents the exponential explosion of different type combinations
as explained earlier. Second, the value comes in as the second parameter and is passed to the
continuation as the second parameter as well, which guarantees both correctness and performance.
Correctness is guaranteed by the C language semantics: the callee should see whatever passed
by the caller. Performance is guaranteed by the calling convention, due to which we can expect x
to live in the same register. Therefore, passing x to the continuation is a no-op in the generated
machine code. The pattern shown in the example can be generalized. A stencil can assign a value
to a register by adding it as a new parameter to the continuation. A stencil can access the value by
having a parameter with matching type at the same parameter ordinal, and can protect the value
for future use by passing it through to the continuation. The lifetime of the value ends when it is
no longer passed to the continuation, and the corresponding register is then free for future use.
In our current implementation, we only use registers to store temporary values while evaluating
expression trees. However, we note that this mechanism can be used to implement the mem2reg
optimization to keep hot local variables in registers as well (see Section 4).
7
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
void eq_int(uintptr_t stack, int lhs, int rhs) {
 bool result = (lhs == rhs);
 (void(*)(uintptr_t, bool) )(stack, result);
}
1
(a) Equality test of two integer values in registers.
Only the continuation-passing call to the next code
fragment is missing.
void eq_int_lvar_rconst(uintptr_t stack) {
 int lhs = *(int*)(stack + );
 int rhs = ;
 bool result = (lhs == rhs);
 (void(*)(uintptr_t, bool) )(stack, result);
}
1
2
3
(b) Equality test of an integer value on the stack to a
constant. The first value’s stack offset and the integer
constant are missing.
void eq_int_pt(uintptr_t stack, uint64_t r1, int rhs) {
 int lhs = ;
 bool result = (lhs == rhs);
 (void(*)(uintptr_t,uint64_t,bool) )(stack, r1, result);
}
1
2
(c) Equality that passes through a value stored in a
register by a prior operation for use by a later operation.
void if(uintptr_t stack, bool test) {
 if (test)
 (void(*)(uintptr_t) )(stack);
 else
 (void(*)(uintptr_t) )(stack);
}
1
2
(d) General if-then-else statement. The calls to the
stencils of the then and else statements are missing.
Fig. 10. The conceptual logic of four out of 98,831 stencils in the stencil library for the high-level language
compiler, generated by instantiating 25 stencil generators written as C++ templated functions. Blue boxes
indicate the holes in stencils, whose implementations are explained in Section 5.1.
struct PatchRecord {
 uint32_t binaryOffset;
 uint32_t ord; // ordinal of the missing value
};
struct Stencil {
 std::vector<uint8_t> binary;
 std::vector<uint32_t> pc32Patches;
 std::vector<PatchRecord> symbol32Patches;
 std::vector<PatchRecord> symbol64Patches;
};
// patches[i] is desired value for missing value ordinal i
void Stencil::copyPatch(uintptr_t dst, uint64_t* patches) {
 memcpy((void*)dst, binary.data(), binary.size());
 for (auto binaryOffset : pc32Patches)
 *(uint32_t*)(dst + binaryOffset) -= dst;
 for (auto p : symbol32Patches)
 *(uint32_t*)(dst + p.binaryOffset) += patches[p.ord];
 for (auto p : symbol64Patches)
 *(uint64_t*)(dst + p.binaryOffset) += patches[p.ord];
}
Fig. 9. The data structure that stores a binary stencil and
the method that materializes it at a given address. The
struct includes the binary code and the locations of missing
values to patch in during copy-and-patch code generation.
To summarize, the stencils come in many
variants for each bytecode or AST node
type, use continuation-passing style, and
leave missing values to be filled in by the
copy-and-patch algorithm. Figure 10 shows
conceptual C++ code for four stencils, replacing the missing values with blue numbered boxes. We show the implementations
of these boxes in Figure 13. The C++ stencils are compiled by MetaVar at compiler
installation time to produce binary stencils,
as described in Section 5.2. Figures 10a–10c
show three of the stencils that implement
equality expressions. Figure 10a takes the
expression’s operands as arguments, compares them, and passes control and context
to the next stencil by calling a continuation
function. The blue box is the missing address to the next stencil. Missing addresses,
and other types of missing values, are filled in when copy-and-patch generates code for an expression at runtime. Since MetaVar compiles the stencils with the GHC calling convention, the binary
code assumes arguments are in registers. Thus, this stencil compares two integers whose values
are stored in registers. Figure 10b is an equality variant where the first operand has been spilled to
the stack, while the second operand is a literal. It has three missing values: the stack offset, the
literal value, and the continuation address. And Figure 10d shows the stencil for an if-then-else,
taking the result of the test as an argument and calling one of two continuation functions.
The copy-and-patch algorithm composes stencils to implement an AST. It attempts to keep values
in registers by selecting variants that work on arguments, like the one in Figure 10a. If a value
is stored in a register and is needed by a later operation, then copy-and-patch chooses stencils
8
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
variants that pass these values through, like the one in Figure 10c. The pass-through stencil, by
inserting arguments passed through to the continuation, forces Clang to ensure register values
at function entry are unchanged when the continuation is called. This encourages Clang to use
other available registers in the function body. When the available registers are insufficient to hold
a temporary value for its lifetime, the copy-and-patch algorithm composes a variant that spills it to
the stack with a variant that uses the spilled value.
The MetaVar system compiles C++ stencils to binary stencils that contain binary code and
information about where the missing values are located. Figure 9 shows the Stencil struct that
stores a stencil. The binaryCode array contains the binary code, followed by three arrays that store
the locations of the stencil’s missing values, so that they can be patched in by the patching phase
of copy-and-patch.
The stencil library maps stencil configurations that identify each stencil to the stencils themselves:
(configuration) → (stencil).
The configurations contain what AST node type the stencil implements, what types it operates on,
whether it operates on constants, registers, or stack locations, and so forth. The stencil library is
generated by the MetaVar system at installation time, as described in Section 5.2. The library is
then used by the copy-and-patch algorithm in Section 4, which weaves together the binary stencils
for the AST nodes to create the generated function.
4 COPY-AND-PATCH CODE GENERATION
The copy-and-patch algorithm can be used to compile both bytecode and high-level languages. We
will only describe compilation of high-level ASTs here, but the algorithm can be adapted to compile
bytecode by removing the step that linearizes a high-level AST using the CPS graph.
The copy-and-patch binary code generation algorithm lowers an AST that describes a high-level
language to binary code. It executes at runtime and produces code performing better than LLVM
-O0 at negligible cost. In most cases, compilation time is less than the time to construct the AST.
The algorithm performs two post-order traversals of the AST: once to plan register usage, and once
to select stencil configurations for AST nodes and construct a compact continuation-passing style
(CPS) call graph. Next, the algorithm traverses the call graph depth-first. At each node, it copies the
binary code of the node’s stencil into the memory region immediately after the previously copied
stencil. Finally, it patches the missing values into the stencil’s binary code, including literal values
used in the AST, stack offsets for local variables and spilled temporaries, and branch, jump, or call
addresses to other stencils.
An AST is lowered to binary code through a CPS call graph. Figure 11 shows the representations
that the Fibonacci function goes through on its way from the AST shown as printed code in
Figure 11a, through the CPS call graph in Figure 11b, to machine code shown in assembly form
in Figure 11c. In each representation, the code that corresponds to each AST node is color-coded
the same way, so that each node can be followed individually through the stages. We will use this
example in our descriptions of each stage.
The copy-and-patch algorithm does light-weight register allocation to keep temporary values in
registers to reduce the number of spills. In our benchmarked implementations, we only use registers
to preserve temporary values produced while evaluating an expression. Specifically, given a budget
on the maximum number of registers and an expression tree where each expression node produces
a value, we perform register allocation using the algorithm described as follows. We perform a
post-order traversal of the AST to abstractly evaluate the expression, and we always evaluate the
children from left to right for each expression node. The traversal maintains the stack of outstanding
temporary operands and, at each step, marks everything below the maximum number of register
9
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
If(n <= 2).Then(
 Return(1ULL)
).Else(
 Return(Call<FibFn>(“fib”, n-1)
 + Call<FibFn>("fib", n-2))
)
(a) C++ code that constructs the AST of the Fibonacci function.
If-Leq
(var-const)
Return Caller
(spill-ret)
Return
Sub
(var-const)
Callee
Callee
Caller
Sub
(var-const)
Add
Literal
(uint64_t)
(b) CPS call graph between stencils. Solid arrows
are tail calls compiled to jump instructions, while
dotted lines require call instructions.
fib function entry
jumps between
consecutive code
blocks are removed
only spilled value
00: mov 0x8(%r13),%r12d
07: mov $0x2,%eax
0c: sub %eax,%r12d
0f: mov %r12d,0x8(%rbp)
13: mov %rbp,%r13
20: mov $0x2,%eax
25: cmp %eax,0x8(%r13)
2c: jg 40
32: movabs $0x1,%rbp
3c: mov %rbp,%rax
3f: retq
40: sub $0x38,%rsp
44: mov %r13,0x8(%rsp)
49: lea 0x10(%rsp),%rbp
4e: callq 90
53: mov 0x8(%rsp),%r13
58: mov %rax,0x10(%r13)
5f: add $0x38,%rsp
63: sub $0x38,%rsp
67: mov %r13,0x8(%rsp)
6c: lea 0x10(%rsp),%rbp
71: callq 00
76: mov 0x8(%rsp),%r13
7b: mov %rax,%rbp
7e: add $0x38,%rsp
82: add 0x10(%r13),%rbp
89: mov %rbp,%rax
8c: retq
90: mov 0x8(%r13),%r12d
97: mov $0x1,%eax
9c: sub %eax,%r12d
9f: mov %r12d,0x8(%rbp)
a3: mov %rbp,%r13
a6: jmpq 20
(c) Assembly code generated by copying the call graph
node stencils and patching in missing values (light blue).
Fig. 11. Fibonacci function AST, its CPS call graph, and the assembly of the binary code generated by copying
and patching each CPS call graph node. Each node or supernode has the same color in each representation.
void if_leq(uintptr_t stack) {
 int lhs = *(int*)(stack + );
 int rhs = ;
 if (lhs <= rhs) {
 ((void(*)(uintptr_t) )(stack);
 } else {
 ((void(*)(uintptr_t) )(stack);
 }
}
1
2
3
4
(a) The template-instantiated C++ logic for
the If-Leq stencil in Figure 11b.
0xb8 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00
0x41 0x39 0x85 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00
0x0f 0x8f 0xee 0xff 0xff 0xff
0xe9 0xe9 0xff 0xff 0xff
2
1
4
3
(b) Clang generates object code, with holes
indicated by linker relocation records.
binary: { /* omitted, see Figure (b) */ }
pc32Patches: { 14 /*binaryOffset*/, 19 /*binaryOffset*/ }
sym32Patches: {
 { 1 /*binaryOffset*/, 2 /*holeOrdinal*/ },
 { 8 /*binaryOffset*/, 1 /*holeOrdinal*/ },
 { 14 /*binaryOffset*/, 4 /*holeOrdinal*/ },
 { 19 /*binaryOffset*/, 3 /*holeOrdinal*/ }
}
sym64Patches: {}
(c) The MetaVar compiler parses the object file, and generates
the Stencil struct as described in Figure 9.
20: b8 02 00 00 00 mov $0x2, %eax
25: 41 39 85 08 00 00 00 cmp %eax, 0x8(%r13)
2c: 0f 8f 0e 00 00 00 jg 40
32: e9 e9 ff ff ff (jmp removed to fallthrough)
(d) At runtime, C&P generates executable code by copying the
object code and patching the holes with runtime known values.
Fig. 12. The lifetime of the If-Leq (var-const) supernode stencil in Figure 11b.
10
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
watermark to be spilled. Additionally, temporary values that cross a subsequent call must also be
spilled because the GHC calling convention used for stencils assigns all registers to the callee (i.e.,
all registers are caller-saved). This algorithm is a simplified version of the Simple Sethi-Ullman
Algorithm [Sethi and Ullman 1970; Wikipedia 2021] that does not choose between the orders of
evaluating a node’s children. We chose to use our modified algorithm primarily due to its very low
overhead and little loss of practical effectiveness. The Simple Sethi-Ullman produces better decision
than ours when it is beneficial to evaluate a right subtree first, but this requires the expression tree
being both large and skewed toward the right side, which is not common. Nevertheless, we note
that implementing the Simple Sethi-Ullman algorithm or the Advanced Seth-Ullman algorithm
are both possible: it is only a trade-off between startup delay and execution performance, not a
limitation of our technique.
As an example, Figure 11c shows the effectiveness of our register allocation for the Fibonacci
function: no temporary values were spilled except the result of the first function call on line 58,
since its lifetime crosses the second function call. All other temporary values are passed in registers
to the stencils that consume them: to name a few, the second Caller stencil to the Add stencil, the
Add stencil to the Return stencil, and the Sub (var-const) stencil to the Callee stencil. There are also
examples where a temporary value is protected by a pass-through parameter: the Caller stencil
produces a temporary value of the new stack frame address, which is to be consumed by the Callee
stencil. The Sub (var-const) stencil is executed in between, so a variant of the Sub (var-const) stencil
that takes one pass-through parameter is selected to protect the value from being clobbered.
We have also explored the possibility of performing mem2reg optimization to promote the storage
of hot local variables from the stack to registers. Our prototype mem2reg implementation gives up
to 10% execution performance boost, but results in about 3× slower compilation. We deemed this
trade-off as not worthwhile in our use cases, so in our benchmarks, we choose to not perform this
optimization. However, in other use cases it may be worthwhile to include the optimization.
During the AST traversal, we also plan the stack frame layout for the function, assigning a
storage offset in the stack frame for each local variable and spilled temporary value. As another
small optimization, once the lifetime of a spilled temporary value ends, its slot in the stack frame
can be reused for another spilled temporary. This reduces stack frame size and improves locality.
The next step converts the AST to a CPS call graph, by selecting stencils that implement the AST
nodes and linking them in the order they will be executed. The CPS call graph is constructed in
the second post-order traversal of the AST. For each node, the algorithm selects the most specific
stencil variant, depending on the AST tree shape and the context (e.g., whether the inputs live
on the stack or in registers). It does a simple tree pattern matching to find sub-trees that can
be implemented with an efficient supernode stencil. Supernodes allow Clang to optimize larger
regions of code. For example, by leveraging advanced assembly instructions supported by the
target architecture (e.g., advanced x86-64 addressing modes), an array access indexed by a constant
or local variable can be compiled into fewer instructions. Having more supernodes allows better
local optimizations and improves execution performance, at the cost of a slightly higher startup
delay (since more branches are executed to perform the pattern matching) and a higher static
memory footprint. Therefore, for our high-level language compiler, designed for database use cases
in which memory footprint is less of a concern, we generated close to 100,000 supernodes, covering
a large set of common logic patterns in programs. One example is demonstrated by the If-Leq
(var-const) supernode in Figure 11b, which implements an if-branch with a condition clause doing
a less-or-equal comparison between a local variable and a constant int. We stress that this is not a
special case, and not even the most complex case: just to name a few more examples, logic like
if (a[i] <op> b[j]), or c = a[i] <op> b[<literal>] can be implemented by one supernode
as well, for any compatible types of local variables a,b,c,i,j. Extensive supernode generation
11
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
is made possible by our powerful MetaVar system, which allows us to systematically generate
large numbers of supernodes easily (see Section 5). However, for applications where a small static
memory footprint is desired (e.g., WebAssembly), we can simply remove the supernode stencils
to get a small stencil library. As an example, the stencil library of our WebAssembly compiler is
only 35 kB. The user can also add new supernode stencils specific to his/her use case, such as fused
multiply-add. When a stencil is selected for one or several AST nodes, the stencil’s configuration
is added to the CPS call graph and a call edge is set to point to the next node in the post-order
traversal. Figure 11b shows the call graph for Fibonacci. Most calls are tail calls (solid arrows),
which the stencil compiler turns into jump instructions. Only two true calls are left: the two call
expressions in the AST.
The CPS call graph is then lowered to binary code by copying the binary stencil code of each
node to contiguous memory. The copy step traverses the CPS call graph in depth-first order starting
at any node that has no predecessors. At each call graph node, it retrieves the stencil corresponding
to the node’s configuration from the stencil library. It then copies the stencil’s binary code into the
memory region following immediately the binary code of the stencil belonging to the preceding call
node. The purpose of copying these into consecutive locations in depth-first order is to maximize
the number of stencil binary codes that jump to a stencil binary code right after it. As these jumps
are fruitless, the stencil copy simply elides them from the copy. Figure 11c shows the binary code
in assembly form resulting from the Fibonacci function. Most jumps were successfully elided (e.g.,
line 82), while only two jumps could not be removed (line 2c and a6). If a stencil node has a fixed
predecessor, and the predecessor is not a conditional branch, then our algorithm is guaranteed to
elide the jump instruction. Therefore, all remaining jump instructions must correspond to some
form of control-flow redirection statement (e.g., if-branches, loops, calls) in the input AST, and are
thus necessary.
The final step patches missing values into the copied binary code. For each stencil, it iterates
through missing values to insert literal values from the AST, stack offsets for variables and temporaries, and branch, jump, or call targets to other stencils (for jumps that were not elided). Figure 9
contains the stencil struct that stores information about missing values, and the logic to patch them.
Figure 11c shows the filled in missing values in blue. For instance, the jump target on line a6 jumps
to the If-Leq (var-const) stencil on line 20, and the value 0x2 on line 20 is the literal 2 from the int
constant literal AST node in the if-branch condition of Figure 11a.
The copy-and-patch technique also supports external function calls. External functions are
important in database applications like the TPC-H queries in Section 7.3, where data is stored in
C++ data structures that must be iterated and accessed from generated code. The external call node
expects the callee to take a single void* parameter, pointing to an array with the actual parameters.
Template metaprogramming techniques can be used to automatically wrap any C++ function
into this form, including functions with non-primitive parameters passed by value, overloaded
functions, and method calls. In fact, the metaprogramming system we built on top of copy-and-patch
supports calling any C++ function in a type-safe manner. Code generated by copy-and-patch can
also propagate C++ exceptions thrown by functions it calls. The wrapper function catches any
thrown exception and stores it to a thread-local variable. The copy-and-patch external call node
has a boolean return value that the wrapper functions use to signal that an exception was thrown.
The return value is checked by generated code, and if true, branches to code that calls destructors,
propagates it through the generated function call stack, and returns it to the calling host code
that must re-throw the exception. Through these features, the copy-and-patch-generated code
efficiently interoperates with the host language such as C++, allowing it to call host code and to
manage the host code’s exceptions. The description of a complete metaprogramming system built
upon the C&P technique is, however, outside the scope of this paper.
12
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
5 STENCIL LIBRARY CONSTRUCTION
The MetaVar compiler constructs the stencil library from programmer-specified stencil generators.
The programmer specifies one stencil generator for each AST node by writing C++ code that uses
template meta-variables to express variants, and uses special macros to express missing values
to be patched at runtime. The MetaVar compiler then iterates at compile-time over the values of
the meta-variables and instantiates the template for every valid combination. The instantiated
templates are compiled by the Clang C++ compiler to object code. The stencil library builder then
parses the object code to retrieve the stencil configurations and binary stencils, which are used to
build the stencil library that is linked to the copy-and-patch runtime.
5.1 Stencil Generators
Stencil generators are templated C++ functions whose template instantiations produce stencils.
Their template parameters are called metavars, which are defined by a fixed set of values. For
instance, the PrimitiveType metavar enumerates primitive types, while a boolean metavar enumerates false and true. The MetaVar compiler iterates through the values of the metavars, subject
to user-defined filter template functions, to instantiate stencils at library installation time.
struct ArithAdd {
 template<typename T /* OperandType */,
 bool spillOutput,
 NumPassthroughs numPassThroughs,
 typename... Passthroughs>
 static void g(uintptr_t stack, Passthroughs... pt, T a, T b) {
 T c = a + b;
 if constexpr (! spillOutput) {
 DEF_CONTINUATON_0(void(*)(uintptr_t, Passthroughs...,T));
 CONTINUATON_0(stack, pt..., c); // continuation
 } else {
 DEF_CONSTANT_1(uint64_t);
 *(T*)(stack + CONSTANT_1) = c;
 DEF_CONTINUATON_0(void(*)(uintptr_t, Passthroughs...));
 CONTINUATON_0(stack, pt...); // continuation
 }
 }
 template<typename T /* OperandType */,
 bool spillOutput,
 NumPassthroughs numPassThroughs>
 static constexpr bool f() {
 if (numPt > numMaxPassthroughs - 2) return false;
 return !std::is_same<T, void>::value;
 }
 static auto metavars() {
 return createMetaVarList(
 typeMetaVar(),
 boolMetaVar(),
 enumMetaVar<NumPassthroughs::X_END_OF_ENUM>());
 }
};
extern "C" void generate(StencilList* result) {
 runStencilGenerator<ArithAdd>(result);
}
Fig. 13. A simplified addition stencil generator written with
C++ template metaprogramming. The generator is processed
by MetaVar to generate stencils for addition.
More precisely, let 𝑆1, . . . , 𝑆𝑛 be the
sets that enumerate the values of each
metavar used in a stencil generator,
where each 𝑆𝑖
is either a finite set of
types or a finite set of values. Let 𝐿 =
𝑆1 × · · · × 𝑆𝑛 be their Cartesian product. Given a template filter function,
𝑓 : 𝐿 → bool, and a template generator
function 𝑔 : 𝐿 → stencil, the MetaVar
system generates a list of pairs ⟨𝑙, 𝑔(𝑙)⟩,
for all 𝑙 ∈ 𝐿 where 𝑓 (𝑙) is true. In other
words, the MetaVar system generates
a list of tuples that map valid metavar
configurations to C++ stencils.
Metavars and filters work together
to produce valid stencils. Within
stencils, missing functions and values are defined by special macros
such as DEF_CONTINUATION_0 and
DEF_CONSTANT_1. We demonstrate these
features by the simplified addition generator and filter functions in Figure 13.
The generator g has three metavars:
the operand type T, whether the result should be spilled, and the number of pass-through variables to be preserved in registers across this stencil. It
produces only stencils whose operands
a and b are stored in registers, while
a more sophisticated generator would
support these having been spilled by a previous operation. It would also handle the case where
13
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
one side has a simple shape (e.g. literal, variable, or simple array indexing). The compile-time
conditional inside g determines whether the generated stencil spills the result or keeps it in a
register. If spill is false, then the generated stencil simply passes the result c to the continuation as
an argument, which will be stored in a register in the GHC calling convention. But if spill is true,
then the result c is instead stored to the stack.
The missing values in a stencil are defined using special macros that also assign an ordinal
to each missing value. For example, DEF_CONTINUATION_0 defines ordinal 0 to be a function of
a specified type, and DEF_CONSTANT_1(int) defines ordinal 1 to be a constant of type int. At
runtime, the stencil can be patched by specifying the desired value for each ordinal, as shown in
Figure 9. Internally, a special macro expands to a piece of code that declares a local variable of
the given function or constant type and assigns to it the address of a pre-defined extern variable.
We forcefully cast extern variables to their assigned types, using reinterpret_cast for functions
and a C union hack to bit-cast constants: see Appendix B in the supplemental material for the
implementation. Since extern variables in C++ are by definition defined outside the current module,
this forces Clang to emit information into the object code that identifies the locations of those
missing values in the binary code. This information can be used to figure out how a stencil shall be
patched, as elaborated in Section 5.2.
The macro-defined constants can be used just like normal constant variables, except that you
cannot compare equality between two macro-defined constants, or between such a constant and
0. The reason for these limitations is that two different extern symbols are never equal, and that
symbols are never null. Additionally, in x86-64 architecture, MetaVar must compile the stencils
using the suitable code model3
[Matz et al. 2020]. Nevertheless, these limitations are easy to work
around.
Finally, the pass-through arguments let the MetaVar system generate variants that avoid clobbering registers that the copy-and-patch algorithm uses for the results of other operations. For example,
when computing term1 + term2, the result of the first term must be stored while computing the
second term. In this case, the copy-and-patch algorithm would choose a stencil variant with one
pass-through variable to protect the register that stores this result. The example in Figure 13 shows
how pass-through template variables are used in a generator: they are passed from the arguments
of the generator to its continuations. For ease of exposition, we only show one set of pass-through
variables. In x86-64 integer and floating-point values are passed in separate sets of registers, so
our implementation needs two sets of pass-through variables for integral and floating-point values
respectively.
Any number of temporaries may need to be stored to compute an expression, but a given machine
only has a limited number of registers. The filter function f, in addition to removing the void type
that cannot be added, also bounds the number of pass-through variables for which stencils will be
generated. As we have seen in Section 4, the copy-and-patch algorithm chooses stencils to store
temporary values in registers to avoid as many spills as possible, and uses pass-through stencils for
subsequent operations. If a temporary cannot be kept in register for its lifetime, C&P will instead
select the stencil that spill it to the stack.
5.2 The MetaVar Compiler
MetaVar compiles stencil generators to the stencil library, which maps stencil configurations to
stencils. As described in Section 3, a stencil configuration describes a stencil, including what node
3There is an architecture idiosyncrasy involved here. To make the most efficient use of the x86-64 instruction set, Clang by
default assumes that the address of an extern symbol fits in signed 32 bits (the “small code model” assumption), despite that
the address is 64 bits. If the value we want to encode could be larger, we need to tell Clang the correct assumption.
14
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
Stencil Generators Object Code
Stencil generation
(by C++ template instantiation)
Stencil Library
C&P Implementation
Config-Stencil Pairs C&P Runtime
Stencil extraction
(using LLVM Object File API)
Library construction Linking
Fig. 14. MetaVar compiles stencil generators to a library that is linked to the copy-and-patch implementation.
type it implements and whether it spills the result, while the stencil consists of binary code and
the locations of missing values. Figure 14 shows the stages of the MetaVar system as arrows, with
boxes showing inputs and outputs. MetaVar leverages both C++ template metaprogramming and
the Clang+LLVM compiler infrastructure to generate the binary stencils, avoiding the need to
implement an optimizing compiler. The result is a concise system that can generate code for any
platform that LLVM supports.
The first stage of the MetaVar system, stencil generation, converts stencil generators to stencils.
Stencil generation is a C++ template program (the runStencilGenerator function in Figure 13)
that for each stencil generator iterates over the Cartesian combination of metavar values using
template recursion. For each combination of metavar values, which we call a configuration, the
stencil generation checks its validity by calling the stencil generator’s filter template function. It
then stores all valid ⟨configuration, function pointer⟩ pairs into a list. As a side effect of taking the
function pointer, all valid stencils are also instantiated by Clang and their implementations are
compiled to object code.
The stencil extraction stage extracts configurations and corresponding stencils from the object
code. The configurations are extracted by executing object code. As we saw in Figure 13, a stencil
generator contains a generate() stub function, containing a piece of boilerplate code that invokes
our runStencilGenerator function and returns a list of stencil configuration and function pointer
pairs. Stencil extraction uses the LLVM JIT machinery to execute this generate() function to
retrieve the configuration. We then use an LLVM JIT API to get symbol names of the stencil
functions from the function pointers in the list. The next step uses the LLVM object file parser
to locate the functions based on the symbol names of the stencils we got in the previous step. It
then extracts their binary code and the linker relocation records containing information about
the extern symbols that were inserted by the placeholder macros, which is used to record the
offsets to the missing values and how to patch them. Specifically, each missing value is a 32 or
64-bit scalar, and the patch shall be computed by initializing it with a fixed constant, optionally
subtracting its memory address, and optionally adding the memory address of a symbol [Matz et al.
2020]. Although this computation rule is technically architecture-dependent, it applies to most
major architectures including x86-64 [Matz et al. 2020], ARM [LinuxBase 1998], and SPARC [Oracle
2020a]. The rule yields the 3 patch vectors and the patch algorithm in Figure 9 and, together with
the binary code, give us a stencil.
The final stage constructs the stencil library from the configuration-stencil pairs. The library
is a C++ file containing a static constant hash map that maps stencil configurations to the binary
stencils in Figure 9, and the API for the runtime to select stencils from the hash map. The library is
linked together with the copy-and-patch implementation to form the copy-and-patch runtime.
As a concrete example, Figure 12 illustrates the lifetime of the If-Leq (var-const) stencil (the
green node in Figure 11b) used in the Fibonacci example. The stencil generator is a templated C++
function that generates various stencil variants for the logic shape if (lhs op rhs) where op is
a comparison operator and lhs and rhs has a simple shape. The C++ template instantiation where
lhs is an int local variable, rhs is an int constant, and op is <= yields the conceptual C++ logic of
the stencil shown in Figure 12a. The logic contains four holes: the offset of the local variable in
the stack frame, the constant literal, and two continuations for the true and false branches. Each
15
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
struct ArithOp {
 template<typename OperandType,
 AstArithmeticExprType operatorType,
 bool isLhsInRegister
 bool spillOutput,
 NumPassThroughs numPassThroughs,
 typename... Passthroughs>
 void f // ... implementation omitted ...
};
template<> struct StencilSelector<ArithOp> {
 static Stencil* Select(
 TypeId OperandType,
 AstArithmeticExprType operatorType,
 bool isLhsInRegister,
 bool spill,
 NumPassThroughs numPassThroughs);
}
Fig. 15. An example of the API between the stencil library and the copy-and-patch runtime. The left side
is the stencil generator that generates the various stencil variants of the ArithOp stencil class. The API on
the right side is automatically generated by the MetaVar compiler from the definitions on the left side and
exposed to the copy-and-patch runtime.
hole is identified by an ordinal, so at runtime we can specify its desired value. Clang compiles
the logic and generates the object code shown in Figure 12b, where the holes are identified by
linker relocation records. The MetaVar compiler can figure out the ordinal of each hole in the
object file, because the C macro trick we used to create holes associates each hole ordinal to an
unique external variable, which translates to a unique symbol referenced by the linker relocation
records. The MetaVar compiler parses the object file, and prints out the code shown in Figure 12c
to construct the C++ Stencil struct (as defined in Figure 9) for this stencil. The code is compiled
and becomes part of the stencil library. At runtime, when we compile the Fibonacci AST, this
stencil is selected to implement the if-branch in the Fibonacci function, its holes are filled with
concrete values (for example, the local variable n has offset 8 in the stack frame), and its tail jump
instruction is removed and becomes a fallthrough to the continuation (the logic in the true branch),
as shown in Figure 12d. This generates the eighteen bytes of executable code in [0x20, 0x32) of
Figure 11c. Note that, most of the above work happens at library build time. The only work that
happens during compilation at runtime is matching the AST with this stencil through a tree pattern
matching, a hash table lookup to retrieve the stencil, a memcpy of those eighteen bytes, and a few
scalar additions to patch the holes, which are all cheap operations.
Finally, we give an example of the API interface between the stencil library and the copyand-patch code generation runtime in Figure 15. In the example, the stencil ArithOp’s C++ template parameters contain the type of the operands, the arithmetic operation kind, etc. MetaVar
then creates an API, where the C++ template parameters are converted to function parameters.
void WasmEmitStencil(
 uint8_t*& dstAddr,
 uint8_t opCode,
 uint32_t numInRegInts,
 uint32_t numInRegFloats,
 bool spillOutput,
 uint32_t numSpilledInts,
 uint32_t numSpilledFloats,
 uint64_t opData);
Fig. 16. The API that handles
the codegen for most of the
WebAssembly opcode.
The typename template parameter becomes a special TypeId enum,
while all enum and boolean template parameters are converted unchanged. At runtime, copy-and-patch selects the stencil by calling the
StencilSelector<ArithOp>::Select function and supplying the
runtime-known configuration values. The Select function uses the
parameters as the key to lookup the hash table and returns the stencil.
The runtime may then invoke the copy-and-patch API described in
Figure 9 to specify the desired values for the holes and generate executable code. The result is a flexible and powerful interface capable
of handling the complex language features required for a high-level
language.
For WebAssembly, since the bytecode instructions are very lowlevel and operate on a stack machine, we can further unify the APIs to
a single interface for even faster code generation, as shown in Figure 16. The opCode, numInRegInts,
numInRegFloats, spillOutput together determines the stencil variant, and the numSpilledInts,
16
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
numSpilledFloats and opData determines the patch values. This lets copy-and-patch process
most of the WebAssembly instructions (all except control instructions) through this single function
API. And all this function does is to look into an array to retrieve the stencil, and then do copy-andpatch to instantiate this stencil to the destination address. There is not even a switch case on the
opcode or on the register configuration. This is why our code generator runs so fast.
6 EVALUATION: WEBASSEMBLY BASELINE COMPILER
We evaluate our claim that our copy-and-patch-based WebAssembly compiler achieves significantly
lower startup delay and better execution performance compare with the conventional baseline
compiler design, and that it narrows the execution performance gap between baseline compilers
and optimizing compilers.
6.1 Methodology
The experiments are run on a single-socket 8-logical-core Intel i7-7700HQ CPU at 2.80GHz with
turbo boost on, running Ubuntu 20.04. The machine has 32GB RAM: large enough so that nothing
is swapped out. All experiments are repeated at least 30 times and the average is reported. Unless
otherwise noted, the width of the 95% statistical confidence interval (CI95) is less than 2% of the
average absolute performance. This implies that with 95% probability, our reported performance is
within 1% relative difference from the truth. Exceptions are Figure 21 and Figure 22, in which we
only report the average performance across three runs, and CI95 is not reported: this is due to the
high amount of human labor and computation resource required to run that benchmark.
We evaluate the startup delay and the execution performance of our compiler against eight WebAssembly compilers used in four industrial software products, including three baseline compilers
and five optimizing compilers:
• Two compilers from Google Chrome 81’s V8 Engine: the Liftoff [Backes 2018] baseline
compiler and the TurboFan [Backes 2018] optimizing compiler.
• Three compilers from Wasmer 1.0 [Akbary et al. 2018]: the Wasmer SinglePass [Zhou 2018]
baseline compiler, and two optimizing compilers named Wasmer Cranelift [Akbary 2018]
and Wasmer LLVM [Lewycky 2018], using CraneLift [Alliance 2018] and LLVM [Lattner
2002] as backend respectively.
• Two compilers from Wasmtime 0.26 [Gohman et al. 2018a]: the Lightbeam [Gohman 2018]
baseline compiler and an optimizing compiler [Gohman et al. 2018b] using Cranelift.
• One compiler from WAVM [Scheidecker and Lin 2020]: an optimizing compiler that uses
LLVM [Lattner 2002] as backend.
Wasmer LLVM and WAVM both use LLVM as backend, but Wasmer LLVM performs strictly worse
than WAVM in both code generation time and execution time on all benchmarks we tested, so we
removed Wasmer LLVM from the results. We are also unable to report the numbers for Wasmtime
Lightbeam, because it reports an “unsupported” error or crashes on all benchmarks we tested. We
report code generation time and execution performance for copy-and-patch and the remaining six
compilers. For in-browser compilers (Google Chrome’s Liftoff and TurboFan), code generation time
measures the time to execute Javascript “new WebAssembly.Module(data)”, after the module is
fully read into the array data, to avoid any overhead related to the disk, network, or Javascript. We
use browser developer flags to select the desired WebAssembly compiler implementation, following
the official instruction [Google 2019]. For the other non-browser WebAssembly compilers, we first
read the whole WebAssembly module to memory to avoid any disk overhead, then measure the
code generation time by timing the C API provided by the respective compiler that compiles a
module to executable code. Some of the compilers support multi-threaded code generation. To
17
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
WASM Code Section Processing Throughput (MB/s)
0
20
40
60
80
Coremark PolyBenchC AutoCAD Clang
Copy+Patch Chrome V8 Liftoff Wasmer SinglePass Wasmer Cranelift
Wasmtime Cranelift Chrome V8 TurboFan WAVM (LLVM)
Fig. 17. The absolute throughput of each WebAssembly
compiler, in terms of megabytes of WebAssembly code
section processed per second. The PolyBenchC column
records the average throughput of the 30 PolyBenchC
benchmark modules (higher is better). The 95% confidence
intervals are the same as in Figure 18.
WebAssembly Startup Delay Normalized to C&P
1
10
100
1000
Coremark PolyBenchC AutoCAD Clang
Chrome V8 Liftoff Wasmer (SinglePass) Wasmer (Cranelift)
Wasmtime (Cranelift) Chrome V8 TurboFan WAVM (LLVM)
C&P
±3.2%
±3.3%
±2.1%
±6.9%
±1.4% ±4.0%
±4.0%
Fig. 18. The log-scale normalized startup delay
of each WebAssembly compiler, with copy-andpatch normalized to 1. The PolyBenchC column
records the average startup delay of the 30 PolyBenchC benchmark modules. All 95% confidence
intervals greater than ±1% are shown.
make the performance results easier to understand, we limit all implementations to use only one
CPU in the code generation time benchmarks. However, we note that WebAssembly is designed so
that compilation is trivially parallelizable at function level, so our implementation can be easily
extended to support multi-threaded compilation with the same scalability as the other compilers,
and all conclusions should still hold in a multi-threaded environment. We additionally note that
our single-threaded implementation is faster than all benchmark rivals using 8 CPUs.
We benchmarked the compilers on four benchmarks. Two of the benchmarks measure both the
execution performance and the startup delay of the compilers:
• CoreMark 1.0 [EEMBC 2009], an industrial-standard benchmark to measure the performance
of a CPU. We used the default random seed and settings of the benchmark. We confirmed
that all compilers produced the correct final checksum.
• PolyBenchC 4.2.1 [Louis-Noel Pouchet 2011], the benchmark used in the original WebAssembly paper [Haas et al. 2017]. It consists of 30 numerical computation kernels extracted from
operations in various application domains.
The other two benchmarks test the most important use case of baseline compilers: compiling
real-world WebAssembly modules that are very large. We used the following real-world modules:
• AutoCAD Web App [AutoCAD 2018], a 47.5 MB WebAssembly module containing a 40.2 MB
WebAssembly code section. The module is downloaded directly from the app website using
its public URL. Notably, Liftoff also used this as a benchmark [Backes 2018].
• clang.wasm [Smith 2018], a 30.5 MB WebAssembly module containing a 27.5 MB WebAssembly code section. The module is downloaded from the official mirror.
For these two benchmarks, we only measure the code generation time, as there is not a clear
criterion to quantitatively measure their execution performance.
6.2 Code Generation Performance
We measured the startup delay of all compilers on all benchmarks. The AutoCAD WebAssembly
module appears to trigger a bug in LLVM, causing all LLVM-based compilers (WAVM and Wasmer
LLVM) to enter a dead loop (did not finish in 4 hours). All other compilations are successful. Figure 17
shows the absolute throughput of each compiler, in terms of megabytes of WebAssembly code
processed per second. Since the high throughput of copy-and-patch renders the throughput bar of
18
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
Time to Execute 10000 Coremark Iterations (second) 0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Copy+Patch
Chrome V8 Liftoff
Wasmer (SinglePass)
Wasmer (Cranelift)
Wasmtime (Cranelift)
Chrome V8 TurboFan
WAVM (LLVM)
±1.9%
Fig. 20. WebAssembly
exec time, Coremark.
C&P
PolyBenchC Execution Time Normalized to C&P 0
1
2
3
2mm
3mm
adi
atax
bicg
cholesky
correlation
covariance
deriche
doitgen
durbin
fdtd-2d
floydgemm
gemver
gesummv
gramschmidt
head-3d
jacobi-1D
jacobi-2D
lu
ludcmp
mvt
nussinov
seidel
symm
syr2k
syrk
trisolv
trmm
Chrome V8 Liftoff Wasmer SinglePass Wasmer Cranelift Wasmtime Cranelift
Chrome V8 TurboFan WAVM (LLVM)
Fig. 21. WebAssembly normalized execution time on each of the
30 PolyBenchC benchmarks, normalized to copy-and-patch.
PolyBenchC Average Execution Time Normlized to C&P 0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Chrome V8 Liftoff
Wasmer (SinglePass)
Wasmer (Cranelift)
Wasmtime (Cranelift)
Chrome V8 TurboFan
WAVM (LLVM)
C&P
Fig. 22. Average of
Figure 21.
many compilers barely visible, we plot the normalized log-scale startup delay (with copy-and-patch
normalized to 1) in Figure 18.
As shown in Figure 18, the startup delay of our compiler is consistently lower than all the other
compilers. Compared with baseline compilers, it is 4.9×–6.5× faster than Liftoff, and 12.7×–18.5×
faster than Wasmer SinglePass. Compared with optimizing compilers, the startup delay is two to
three orders of magnitudes lower.
C&P Executable Code Generation Throughput (MB/s)
0
100
200
300
400
Coremark
PolyBench
AutoCAD
Clang
Fig. 19. Throughput of
machine code generated
by copy-and-patch (MB/s).
The code generation throughput of our compiler on Coremark and
PolybenchC is lower than on AutoCAD and Clang. This is because the
code generation memory manager in our implementation takes about
0.2 ms to initialize. This cost is negligible for large modules, but the
Coremark and PolyBenchC benchmark modules are small, containing
only about 30 kB of WebAssembly code. Copy-and-Patch needs 0.6 ms to
generate code for one such module, so the 0.2 ms initialization cost takes
one third of the time.
Figure 19 demonstrates the throughput of machine code generated
by copy-and-patch. As one can see, on large modules like AutoCAD
and Clang, we are capable of generating more than 300MB of machine
code per second using a single CPU. Such throughput is made possible
by copy-and-patch’s design that turns the task of code generation into,
literally, copy (by memcpy) and patch (by a few scalar additions).
6.3 Execution Performance
Copy-and-Patch not only generates code fast, but also generates fast code. We measure the execution
performance of all compilers on the Coremark and PolyBenchC benchmarks. Figure 20 reports the
time to execute 10000 Coremark iterations. Figure 21 reports the normalized execution time of each
of the 30 PolyBenchC benchmarks, with copy-and-patch’s execution time normalized to 1. The
average normalized execution time of PolyBenchC is reported in Figure 22.
As one can see, on Coremark and all 30 PolyBenchC benchmarks, copy-and-patch consistently
performs better than all baseline compilers. Compared with Liftoff, we are on average 39% faster
on Coremark, and on average 63% faster on PolyBenchC. The speedup compared with Wasmer
SinglePass is similar. The performance of copy-and-patch is even comparable with one optimizing
19
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
compiler (Wasmer Cranelift), being 2.6% slower on Coremark but 4.6% faster on PolyBenchC.
Therefore, we conclude that copy-and-patch replaces the role of baseline compilers, and narrows
the performance gap between baseline compilers and optimizing compilers.
6.4 Other Metrics
Our WebAssembly implementation contains 1666 stencils taking 35 kB of memory, which is built
in less than a minute at compiler installation time. The stencil library is small because we did not
implement supernodes (e.g., arithmetic operations taking a constant operand, branch if a relational
operation is true). We anticipate that our execution performance could be further improved, at a
cost of a larger stencil library and a slightly higher startup delay, if we had implemented supernodes.
7 EVALUATION: HIGH-LEVEL LANGUAGE COMPILER
In this section, we evaluate our C-like high-level language compiler built on top of copy-and-patch.
The compiler is implemented as a domain-specific language (DSL) library embedded in the C++ host
language. The language constructs are exposed to users as a set of C++ APIs (for example, Declare,
For, If, Call), which build the user program AST behind the scene. Figure 11a demonstrates
an example program in our DSL. Once a user program is built, it may be interpreted using the
AST interpreter, compiled to binary code using copy-and-patch, or lowered to LLVM IR and then
compiled to binary code using LLVM. The three backends are functionally equivalent and operate
on the same input program. This allows an apple-to-apple comparison of the startup delay and
execution performance tradeoffs presented by the techniques.
Our compiler is a general purpose compiler since it compiles a C-like language. Section 7.2
evaluates its performance on a few well known microbenchmark algorithms. However, one of
the most important use cases of such a compiler is in SQL databases, where SQL queries are
lowered to concrete program logic, then compiled to binary code using the compiler and executed.
Therefore, we implemented a SQL query compiler prototype on top of our compiler and evaluated
its performance on TPC-H queries, which is elaborated in Section 7.3.
In both cases, we evaluate our central claim that copy-and-patch replaces both LLVM -O0 compilation and interpreters. Copy-and-Patch generates code that executes faster than -O0 compilation
and an order of magnitude faster than interpretation, with negligible startup delay. Higher LLVM
optimization levels are still desirable for long-running computations, but copy-and-patch narrows
the range in which they are useful, as their compilation overhead is three orders of magnitude
higher than copy-and-patch code generation. We also quantify the effect of the copy-and-patch
optimizations, to shed light on where the performance of its generated code comes from.
7.1 Methodology
The hardware environment is the same as described in Section 6.1. All experiments are repeated at
least 100 times and the average is reported. For all experiments, the width of the 95% statistical
confidence interval (CI95) is less than 2% of the average absolute performance. This implies that
with 95% probability, our reported performance is within 1% relative difference from the truth. Time
is measured using the clock_gettime() Linux high resolution clock API. The stencils and the
copy-and-patch runtime are compiled by Clang++ 10 using options -O3 -DNDEBUG. The MetaVar
system and the LLVM backend of our metaprogramming language use LLVM library v10.0.0, the
latest version at the time of writing. LLVM has an additional fixed startup cost of about 1 ms when
compiling a module. Therefore, for microbenchmarks where the modules are small, we amortized
out that cost by generating 100 clones of the function inside the module and report 1/100 of total
code generation time, to reflect the true time LLVM spent generating code.
20
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
We implemented three microbenchmarks and eight relational queries from the standard TPC-H
database management system benchmark suite [TPC 2020]. We generate the TPC-H benchmark
database using the official generator dbgen with a scale factor of 0.3 (about 380MB data). This
scale factor is a typical size of the database partition assigned to each CPU when TPC-H is used
to benchmark a distributed database [Fontaine 2018; MemSQL 2020c]. To emphasize how LLVM
optimization levels and interpreters compare to copy-and-patch, we report their startup and
execution times normalized to multiples of copy-and-patch. We report the absolute running time
for every experiment in Appendix C in the supplemental material.
7.2 Microbenchmarks
We explore the startup–execution time Pareto frontier of several approaches to online code generation. The Pareto frontiers are the set of Pareto efficient points for which no gain can be had in startup
delay without giving up some execution time and vice versa. We compare copy-and-patch (C&P) to
the LLVM compilation levels -O0, -O1, -O2, and -O3. We also include the Peloton interpreter [Kost
2018] from the query execution engine of the Peloton database management system [Menon et al.
2017; Pavlo et al. 2017]. It interprets a subset of the LLVM IR, but this IR is low-level and leads
to high interpretation cost. Therefore, to get a better baseline for interpretation, we developed a
higher-level AST Interpreter that runs approximately 1.5× faster than Peloton’s interpreter.
We used these systems to execute three microbenchmarks and recorded their startup delay and
execution time on synthetic input. The microbenchmarks include a function to compute Fibonacci
numbers (Figure 11a), an implementation of Euler’s sieve [Gries and Misra 1978], and an implementation of quicksort. The Fibonacci function is small with two recursive calls, demonstrating the
efficiency of the generated code across calls. Euler’s sieve is heavy on arithmetic and demonstrates
the efficiency of generated code across compute stencils. And quicksort is a mix of these traits.
The C&P technique moves the Pareto frontier of the three microbenchmarks, effectively rendering
both -O0 compilation and interpretation obsolete. Figure 23 plots the startup delay of each approach
against the execution times for the three microbenchmarks. LLVM -O2 and -O3 have the same
startup and execution times, so we show only LLVM -O2. All times are normalized to C&P. In all
cases, LLVM -O0 falls behind the Pareto frontier, meaning C&P is a strictly better choice.
The AST interpreter generally has a lower startup cost than C&P, but in both cases the cost is
negligible (1 µs vs 1 −-3 µs) compared to all but trivial program executions. We therefore posit that
using the copy-and-patch technique is preferable to interpreters in metaprogramming systems.
Moreover, the Pareto frontier line between C&P and LLVM -O1 is steep, meaning the improved
execution performance comes at a high compilation cost. For example, for Euler’s sieve, a 1442×
higher compilation cost yields only a 24% execution performance gain. This decreases the number
of applications that benefit from optimizing compilation, and it should therefore be reserved for
functions that will be run for a significant period of time.
Finally, we measure the startup and execution time of the microbenchmarks implemented in
Java, using OpenJDK 11’s Java bytecode interpreter [Center 2020] and HotSpot JIT [Oracle 2020b].
This compares C&P to an industry-strength interpreter and JIT. We note that this is not an appleto-apple comparison, since Java has the advantage of working on pre-compiled and pre-optimized
bytecode, instead of a high-level AST generated at runtime. Nevertheless, the Java interpreter’s
execution time is 4.4×–36× slower than C&P. The HotSpot JIT’s compilation time, measured with
JITWatch [Newland 2020], is from 40% faster to 20% slower than LLVM -O3, while its execution
time is 20%–70% slower than LLVM -O3. Thus, the conclusion of our comparison between C&P
and LLVM also holds for Hotspot JIT.
21
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad

	







!"#$%&'()*+,-)./0'"1+2'$)
3
4
5
4
5
3
5
3
5
3
345 346 543 643 5343 6343 53343
AST
Interpreter
Peleton
Interpreter
C&P
O0
O1
O2 behind pareto-frontier
132x
(a) Fibonacci numbers
!"#$%&'()*+,-)./0'"1+2'$)
3
4
5
4
5
3
5
3
5
3
345 346 543 643 5343 6343 53343
Peleton
Interpreter
AST
Interpreter C&P
O0
O2O1
1442x
24%
49%
28x
(b) Euler’s sieve
!"#$%&'()*+,-)./0'"1+2'$)
3
4
5
4
5
3
5
3
5
3
345 346 543 643 5343 6343 53343
Peleton
Interpreter
AST
Interpreter
C&P
O0
O2
O1
negligible
difference in
startup time
(c) Quicksort
Fig. 23. The Pareto frontier of LLVM’s compilation levels, C&P, and interpreters on three microbenchmarks.
C&P dominates the LLVM -O0 optimization level: it produces better code in two orders of magnitude less time.
C&P also replaces interpretation in practice: both have negligible startup overhead, but C&P’s generated
code runs an order of magnitude faster.
7.3 TPC-H Performance
A typical SQL query compiler, such as Hyper [Neumann 2011], PostgreSQL [PostgresSQL 2020],
Peloton [Menon et al. 2017], or MemSQL [MemSQL 2020b], consists of three components: the SQL
parser, the SQL query planner, and the plan executor. The SQL parser parses a user-provided SQL
text to a SQL AST. The SQL query planner determines the most efficient plan to execute the SQL
AST, and generates a query plan tree that describes the plan (e.g., join order, join method, operator
order, and so on). Finally, the plan executor lowers the query plan tree to LLVM IR, then LLVM is
invoked to compile the IR to binary code.
We have implemented such a database query compiler, but our query compiler lowers the input
query plan tree to a program in our C-like language using our metaprogramming DSL library. The
program may then be executed using the AST interpreter, the copy-and-patch backend, or the
LLVM backend, letting us compare their performance on database workloads. Our query compiler
supports most of the important SQL execution plan nodes, including table scan, filter, hash join,
projection, aggregation, group-by, order-by, and a number of SQL scalar operators. However, we
note two differences between our prototype and an industrial implementation.
First, since the SQL parser and the SQL query planner are independent from the code generation
techniques, for the purpose of our benchmark, we did not implement these components. The input
to our compiler is thus a hand-coded query plan tree, instead of a SQL query text. While the query
plan nodes we supported should be sufficient to execute most of the TPC-H queries, many queries
require complicated rewriting to yield a reasonable query plan tree, which requires a lot of labor
that is unrelated to the main point of our evaluation. Therefore, we only implemented those 8
TPC-H queries whose execution plans follow directly from the query text.
Second, our implementation is simple, with only 600 lines of core logic (not counting comments,
empty lines and curly braces) to call our DSL APIs and construct the program. Industry database
management systems are much more complex, and generate much larger programs than we do to
support the complexities required by a real-world database. These complexities include SQL-specific
semantics (e.g. null-related behavior, collations), transaction semantics, more complex data structure
and execution strategy, larger-than-RAM datasets, parallel and distributed execution, and more.
Therefore, conditioning on the same compilation technique, an industrial database needs much
more time to compile a query than our prototype does, which further motivates fast compilation
techniques. We validated this using the MemSQL product trial: the TPC-H queries take 4.8×–52×
(average 16.4×) longer to compile than our query compiler when both are using LLVM -O3, and
one compilation can take up to 4.5 seconds, making compilation time a concern.
22
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
!
!"
!""
!"""
#! #$ #% #& #!" #!' #!( #!)
**+,-./" **+,-./! **+,-./' **+,-./$
C&P
!"!
!"#
$"!
$"#
%"!
&$ &' &# &( &$! &$% &$) &$*
++,-./0! ++,-./0$ ++,-./0% ++,-./0'
C&P
Fig. 24. Normalized startup delay (left) and execution time (right), as multiples of C&P, of code generated
by the LLVM optimization levels across the TPC-H queries. C&P generates code two orders of magnitude
faster (up to 276×) than LLVM -O0 and three orders of magnitude (up to 1435×) faster than the other LLVM
optimization levels. The resulting code performs on average 14% better than LLVM -O0, 22% slower than
LLVM -O1, 25% slower than LLVM -O2, and 24% slower than LLVM -O3.
!"!
!"#
$"!
$"#
%"!
&$ &' &# &( &$! &$% &$) &$*
+,-.,/01234-5 6+7189:;,./<,=9:
C&P
!
"!
#!
$!
%" %$ %& %' %"! %"# %"( %")
C&P
Fig. 25. Normalized startup delay and AST construction cost (left) and execution time (right) of the AST
interpreter across the TPC-H queries, as multiples of C&P. The interpreter has less than half the startup delay
of C&P, but both costs are negligible as it takes longer to construct the AST. And the interpreter executes
6–27 times slower than C&P.
Comparison to LLVM Compilation. We demonstrate the performance of copy-and-patch compared to
LLVM on TPC-H benchmark queries. We build ASTs from query plans using our metaprogramming
system and lower them to binary code with copy-and-patch and LLVM at each optimization level.
Figure 24 (left) shows the compilation time of each LLVM optimization level and Figure 24 (right)
shows the execution time of the resulting code, both normalized to multiples of copy-and-patch.
LLVM -O0 takes two order of magnitude more time to compile and produces less performant
code. The other LLVM optimization levels take about three orders of magnitude more time to
compile (1083–1435×), but produces 1.2%–37.3% better performing code (the average and median
for -O3 are both 24%). This shows that the results from Section 7.2 hold for realistic code in a
metaprogramming system. Copy-and-Patch dominates LLVM -O0, and there are fewer cases that
are beneficial to compile at a higher optimization level. While higher optimization levels used to
make sense when the average 38% speedup over -O0 could amortize a 9.2× average increase in
compilation time, with copy-and-patch a smaller 24% speedup must amortize an average 1286×
increase in compilation time. For example, TPC-H Q5 compiles in 0.25 s with LLVM -O3 in our
compiler, and the resulting code performs 1.2% better than copy-and-patch. To pay back the cost of
the 1435× compilation time increase over copy-and-patch, the query would need to run for 21 s.
On the TPC-H data set, however, the query finished execution in less than 0.1 s. Furthermore, in
an industry-strength database, compilation would take several times longer, but execution would
likely be faster due to better-engineered execution strategies, rendering the gap even larger.
Comparison to AST Interpretation. The copy-and-patch algorithm outperforms our AST interpreter
on the TPC-H benchmarks by an order of magnitude, as shown in Figure 25 (right). As shown
23
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
Number of increment statements (thousands)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
C&P LLVM -O0 LLVM -O1 LLVM -O2 LLVM -O3
Fig. 26. The normalized startup delay of C&P and
LLVM optimization levels as the size of the input
program increases. To demonstrate scalability, the
time it took each algorithm to compile 10k statements is normalized to 1, so perfect scaling line
would end at y-axis 80. C&P scales near-linearly
(ending at y-axis 98), while the other lines show
worse scalability.
!"# $"%&% '$()*
1
17.2 5.6 5.5
jump removal
register alloc
optimized C&P
misc low-level opt.
super nodes
unoptimized C&P
interpreter
Fig. 27. Normalized microbenchmark running times with
optimized C&P in dark blue. Each bar on top of that shows
the running time added by removing each optimization.
in Figure 25 (left), the startup overhead of C&P is two–three times higher than the interpreter,
but both are so small that they are negligible: in most cases it takes longer to construct the AST.
For example, it takes copy-and-patch 178 µs to generate code for TPC-H Q5, but constructing the
AST from query plan already takes 326 µs. And it takes the interpreter 1.17 s to execute it. Thus,
copy-and-patch essentially completely replaces interpreters for database query execution.
7.4 Copy-and-Patch Scalability
As a baseline compiler, the copy-and-patch algorithm runs in linear time, requiring only two
traversals of the AST and one traversal of the CPS call graph. Optimizing compilers like LLVM,
on the other hand, contain non-linear algorithms. Figure 26 shows how the LLVM optimization
levels scale as the input program size grows, on a synthetic function containing a sequence of
statements that increment a variable by another variable. The performance of LLVM -O0 bogs
down in instruction selection, while the higher optimization levels spend their time collapsing
the increments into a single resulting statement. In both cases, however, LLVM compilation is
increasingly slow compared to copy-and-patch as the source code size increases.
7.5 Copy-and-Patch Optimization Breakdown
Copy-and-Patch employs several optimizations to produce fast code. Figure 27 shows the impact
of these optimizations on the three microbenchmarks as a stacked bar graph. The runtimes are
normalized so that unoptimized C&P is at one. The blue bars show the runtime of the optimized
versions, and each bar stacked on top shows the runtime added by removing one optimization. The
largest gain comes from the core of the C&P technique, which generates specialized AST node
implementations with direct branch instructions and directly-embedded runtime constants, yielding
a 5.5× to 17.2× speedup compared with an interpreter. Inside C&P, jump removal and light-weight
register allocation accounts for the bulk of the runtime saved through optimization. The Sieve
benchmark also benefits from the supernodes, because it is more dominated by memory accesses
and arithmetic expressions than the other benchmarks. Finally, a few low-level optimizations, such
as instruction block aligning, account for the last part of the optimization gains.
7.6 Other Costs and Metrics
The AST in our implementation consists of 25 types of nodes that implement the statements and
expressions of an imperative language with some object-oriented capabilities.
The stencil library consists of 98,831 stencils and is constructed at library installation time in
14 min using 6 threads. The code and data in the stencil library consume 17.5 MB of memory at
24
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
runtime. In contrast, the LLVM library consumes 22.8 MB of memory at runtime in our build. The
numbers are measured by computing the total size of symbols belonging to the respective library
(whose names start with llvm:: and stencil:: respectively), using the nm Linux command.
Finally, adding an AST node requires adding a stencil generator, but the required effort is modest.
For example, adding a new generator for an add operator with SQL overflow semantics takes 82
lines of code, 17 of which are new logic, while the rest are boilerplate copied from other generators.
8 RELATED WORK
We compare the copy-and-patch algorithm and our MetaVar system with work in three areas:
baseline compilers, staged compilation that generates binary code by symbolically executing an
interpreter, and build-time code library generation approaches that contrast to MetaVar.
Depending on how the code is generated, baseline compilers can be categorized into two classes:
baseline compilers that use platform-dependent machine instruction assemblers to generate code,
and baseline compilers that generates code by concatenating pre-compiled binary snippets. The
term “template JITs” is often used to refer to both, but for the purpose of distinguishing them, we
will call the former “assembler-based baseline compiler” and only the latter “template JITs”.
Template JITs
Template JIT is the technique that is most similar to copy-and-patch. A template JIT uses an
optimizing compiler (e.g., C, Java) to generate binary snippets at build time, and at runtime generate
code by concatenating those binary snippets. Examples include [Ertl and Gregg 2003; Iliasov 2003;
Piumarta and Riccardi 1998; Wimmer et al. 2013]. The Maxine compiler [Wimmer et al. 2013]
generates snippets from Java functions, while the other systems generate snippets from C functions.
There are three major differences between copy-and-patch and the template JIT techniques
described above. First, copy-and-patch has a patching phase. None of the papers above supported
patching the binary code to burn in literals, stack offsets, and jump addresses, so their technique
only works if the binary code can be concatenated without modification. This implies that all
jumps and calls are indirect, and that all constants must be retrieved from memory, resulting in
inferior execution performance. Second, copy-and-patch has the concept of stencil variants, which
allows copy-and-patch to not only generate higher-quality code by selecting the most matching
variant (e.g., adding a value in register with a constant), but also perform optimizations like register
allocation and super-instructions, thus improving execution performance further. Third, all above
papers target low-level bytecode assembling. In contrast, the use of a CPS call graph, and the
flexibility of the binary stencils allow copy-and-patch to be used not only for low-level bytecode
assembling, but also for high-level language compilation.
Assembler-Based Baseline Compilers
Using a machine code assembler to generate code is another approach to baseline compilers. The
baseline compiler decide what assembly instruction to emit, and then the machine code assembler
assembles it to machine code. Baseline compilers like the Google Chrome Liftoff [Backes 2018],
the Firefox WebAssembly baseline compiler [Clark 2018], and Wasmer SinglePass [Zhou 2018] all
employ this approach. Unsurprisingly, a lot of work has been done to improve the performance of
machine code assemblers. VCODE [Engler 1996] proposed to use a library of hand-written platformspecific instruction implementations to speed up the assembling process, and this approach was
also followed in AsmJIT [Kobalicek 2014], DynASM for Lua [Pall 1999], and as a case study in
Terra [DeVito et al. 2014]. The DCG system [Engler and Proebsting 1994] also attempts greedy
register allocation, but only works under the unrealistic assumption that no spilling is ever needed,
and also runs 35 times slower than VCODE [Engler 1996].
25
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
In the world of bytecode assemblers, copy-and-patch has two advantages compared with baseline
compilers using a machine code assembler. First, as shown in Section 6, copy-and-patch not only
emits code faster, but also emits faster code. Second, since the stencils are generated by Clang, we
don’t need to figure out what assembly instruction to use, thus reducing the engineering cost.
In the world of full compilers, the benefit of our approach is reflected in both engineering cost
and performance. When the task is to lower a high-level program to machine code, assembling
the instructions is not the most difficult part. Deciding what to assemble is. We need optimization,
assembly instruction selection, and register allocation to produce high quality code. A machine
code assembler cannot provide any of these. Copy-and-Patch solves the problem by using Clang to
generate the AST node stencils. By offloading all low-level and architecture-specific details to Clang,
we avoid the prohibitively high engineering cost of re-inventing the big wheel of target-optimized
instruction selection and assembling for every architecture, and is portable to any architecture
supported by LLVM. Furthermore, copy-and-patch pushes the CPU cost of register allocation,
instruction selection and assembling to library build time. At runtime, it only copies pre-built
chunks of instructions, which is clearly faster than doing register allocation and then selecting and
assembling each machine instruction.
Techniques Originated in Other Areas
Continuation-passing style [Steele 1977], which is similar to threaded code [Bell 1973], is originally
used to optimize an interpreter’s performance, as well as in compilation of functional languages.
We use this technique to weave together the control flow of stencils. In this technique, control flow
passes through an AST bottom-up, letting us convert calls to jumps.
Superinstruction [Casey et al. 2003; Proebsting 1995] is a well-known technique to reduce indirect
jump overhead between interpreter opcodes. Our supernode is similar to superinstruction; but in
our use case, since unnecessary jumps between opcodes are already eliminated, supernodes are
only a modest optimization to improve the quality of generated code.
The idea of using external variables to locate holes to burn in runtime constants is used by Noel
et al. [1998]. However, their use case is runtime specialization of statically known logic and cannot
be used in our use case where the logic is generated at runtime. Their technique is also more
verbose than ours. QEMU [Bellard 2005] also used this trick to translate CPU instructions between
architectures, but requires non-standard GCC extensions that has since been removed.
Staged Compilation and Dynamic Specialization
Staged compilation [Consel et al. 1998; Thibault et al. 2000] and dynamic specialization [Finkel
et al. 2019], given an interpreter implementation and an opcode sequence, generates specialized
optimized binary code by symbolically evaluating the interpreter on the opcode sequence. The
major advantage is that the user only needs to write an interpreter backend, and the specializer
automatically generates binary code. This code generation process, however, runs slower than a
hand-written backend, so it is not suitable for the use case where compilation time matters.
Build-time Code Library Generation
Like the stencil library, FFTW [Frigo and Johnson 1998] employs a code library approach. At
compilation time, it creates a collection of codelets that implement optimized variants of FFT on
various fixed-length input sequences. It has a dedicated compiler that generates optimized C code
implementing codelets. At runtime, input is split into smaller pieces using a divide-and-conquer
strategy and, when a piece is small enough, it is dispatched to one of the pre-built codelets. The FFTW
codelet library is similar in spirit to the stencil library, except that it only contains implementations
of FFTW and it does not burn in constants. The FFTW algorithm calls codelets by indirect function
26
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
calls, which is acceptable because each pre-built implementation does significant work. Nevertheless,
the paper mentioned that reading runtime constants from memory hurts performance. We envision
that our MetaVar system’s ability to burn runtime constants into instruction flow and make indirect
jumps and calls direct could further improve the performance of the generated FFTW codelets.
9 CONCLUSION
We introduced copy-and-patch, a novel compilation technique that generates decent executable
code at a negligible compilation cost. We envision copy-and-patch used in domains where fast
compilation is important, notably, as the baseline compilation tier in JIT compilers. We empirically
evaluated its potential in two such domains: SQL query compilation and WebAssembly compilation.
In both domains, we demonstrated that copy-and-patch significantly outperforms existing techniques and approaches for fast compilation, including the current state-of-the-art baseline compiler
implementations (V8 Liftoff and Wasmer Singlepass), LLVM -O0 compilation, and interpreters.
The copy-and-patch algorithm and the stencil generator system are extensible by design. New
AST nodes can be added by users seeking better performance for a new, perhaps domain-specific,
language construct. And new supernode stencil generators can be added for better local optimization.
The type system of the AST can also be expanded in future work to include vector types to target
vectorized instructions. Therefore, we believe copy-and-patch will find a place in domains other
than SQL query compilation and WebAssembly compilation as well.
We envision two areas of future work. First, new general-purposed optimizations can be implemented, such as common subexpression elimination, loop unrolling, and vectorization. Of course,
these will increase compilation time, but will do so starting from a lower starting point. Second,
copy-and-patch can be combined with domain-specific optimization techniques, most notably, the
type profiling, type speculation, and inline caching techniques that optimize the performance of
dynamic-typed languages. With these optimizations, we believe copy-and-patch can also be used
as a fast profiling tier or even a fast optimizing tier in dynamic language JIT engines.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our anonymous reviewers for their comments that helped us improve this manuscript.
We would also like to thank Alex Aiken, Saman Amarasinghe, Saam Barati, Ajay Brahmakshatriya,
Cheng Chen, Stephen Chou, David Durst, Slava Egorov, Lang Hames, Pat Hanrahan, Scott Kovach,
Richard Peng, Zhou Sun, Leszek Swirski, and Yinzhan Xu for helpful comments, review, and
references. This work was supported by the Stanford Agile Hardware Center.
REFERENCES
Syrus Akbary. 2018. Wasmer Cranelift backend. Wasmer. https://github.com/wasmerio/wasmer/tree/master/lib/compilercranelift
Syrus Akbary, Ivan Enderlin, Mark McCaskey, Nick Lewycky, Heyang Zhou, Brandon Fish, Lachlan Sneff, and Mackenzie
Clark. 2018. Wasmer: The leading WebAssembly Runtime supporting WASI and Emscripten. Wasmer Inc. https://wasmer.io/
Bytecode Alliance. 2018. Cranelift Code Generator. Bytecode Alliance. https://github.com/bytecodealliance/cranelift
AutoCAD. 2018. AutoCAD Web App. AutoCAD. https://web.autocad.com/
Clemens Backes. 2018. Liftoff: a new baseline compiler for WebAssembly in V8. Google. https://v8.dev/blog/liftoff
JF Bastien, Keith Miller, and Saam Barati. 2017. Assembling WebAssembly. Safari. https://webkit.org/blog/7691/webassembly/
James R Bell. 1973. Threaded code. Commun. ACM 16, 6 (1973), 370–372.
Fabrice Bellard. 2005. QEMU, a Fast and Portable Dynamic Translator. In 2005 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX
ATC 05). USENIX Association, Anaheim, CA, 41–46. https://www.usenix.org/conference/2005-usenix-annual-technicalconference/qemu-fast-and-portable-dynamic-translator
Jeff Bezanson, Alan Edelman, Stefan Karpinski, and Viral B Shah. 2017. Julia: A fresh approach to numerical computing.
SIAM review 59, 1 (2017), 65–98.
27
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
Kevin Casey, David Gregg, M. Anton Ertl, and Andrew Nisbet. 2003. Towards Superinstructions for Java Interpreters.
In Software and Compilers for Embedded Systems, Andreas Krall (Ed.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
329–343.
IBM Knowledge Center. 2020. Disabling the Java JIT Compiler. IBM. https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/
SSYKE2_8.0.0/com.ibm.java.vm.80.doc/docs/jit_disable.html
Lin Clark. 2018. Making WebAssembly even faster: Firefox’s new streaming and tiering compiler. Mozilla. https://hacks.
mozilla.org/2018/01/making-webassembly-even-faster-firefoxs-new-streaming-and-tiering-compiler/
Charles Consel, Luke Hornof, Renaud Marlet, Gilles Muller, Scott Thibault, E-N Volanschi, Julia Lawall, and Jacques Noyé.
1998. Tempo: Specializing systems applications and beyond. Comput. Surveys 30, 3es (1998), 5.
Zachary DeVito, James Hegarty, Alex Aiken, Pat Hanrahan, and Jan Vitek. 2013. Terra: A Multi-Stage Language for
High-Performance Computing. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation (Seattle, Washington, USA). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 105–116.
Zachary DeVito, Daniel Ritchie, Matt Fisher, Alex Aiken, and Pat Hanrahan. 2014. First-Class Runtime Generation of
High-Performance Types Using Exotypes. In Proceedings of the 35th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation (Edinburgh, United Kingdom). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
77–88. https://doi.org/10.1145/2594291.2594307
EEMBC. 2009. CoreMark Benchmark. EEMBC. https://www.eembc.org/coremark/
Dawson R Engler. 1996. VCODE: a retargetable, extensible, very fast dynamic code generation system. ACM SIGPLAN
Notices 31, 5 (1996), 160–170.
Dawson R Engler and Todd A Proebsting. 1994. DCG: An efficient, retargetable dynamic code generation system. ACM
SIGPLAN Notices 29, 11 (1994), 263–272.
Martin Anton Ertl and David Gregg. 2003. Implementation issues for superinstructions in Gforth. In Proceedings of EuroForth
2003. Citeseer, Herefordshire, UK, 9.
H. Finkel, D. Poliakoff, J. S. Camier, and D. F. Richards. 2019. ClangJIT: Enhancing C++ with Just-in-Time Compilation. In
2019 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Performance, Portability and Productivity in HPC (P3HPC). IEEE, Denver, CO,
USA, 82–95. https://doi.org/10.1109/P3HPC49587.2019.00013
Dimitri Fontaine. 2018. PostgreSQL 11 and Just In Time Compilation of Queries. CitusData. https://www.citusdata.com/blog/
2018/09/11/postgresql-11-just-in-time/
M. Frigo and S. G. Johnson. 1998. FFTW: an adaptive software architecture for the FFT. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Vol. 3. IEEE, Seattle, WA, USA, 1381–1384. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.1998.681704
GHC and LLVM. 2020. LLVM Documentation on GHC Calling Convention. The Glasgow Haskell Team and LLVM Team.
https://releases.llvm.org/10.0.0/docs/LangRef.html?highlight=ghc#calling-conventions
Dan Gohman. 2018. Introducing Lightbeam: An Optimising Streaming WebAssembly Compiler. Bytecode Alliance. http:
//troubles.md/posts/lightbeam/
Dan Gohman, Pat Hickey, Alex Crichton, Andrew Brown, Benjamin Bouvier, and Nick Fitzgerald. 2018a. WasmTime: A
small and efficient runtime for WebAssembly & WASI. Bytecode Alliance. https://wasmtime.dev/
Dan Gohman, Pat Hickey, Alex Crichton, Andrew Brown, Benjamin Bouvier, and Nick Fitzgerald. 2018b. WasmTime Cranelift
Compiler. Bytecode Alliance. https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime/tree/main/crates/cranelift
Google. 2019. WebAssembly compilation pipeline. Google. https://v8.dev/docs/wasm-compilation-pipeline
David Gries and Jayadev Misra. 1978. A Linear Sieve Algorithm for Finding Prime Numbers. Commun. ACM 21, 12 (Dec.
1978), 999–1003. https://doi.org/10.1145/359657.359660
W3C Community Group. 2017. WebAssembly 1.0 Core Specification. W3C Community Group. https://webassembly.github.
io/spec/core/
W3C Community Group. 2018. https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/blob/main/phases/snapshot/docs.md. W3C Community
Group. https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/blob/main/phases/snapshot/docs.md
Andreas Haas, Andreas Rossberg, Derek L. Schuff, Ben L. Titzer, Michael Holman, Dan Gohman, Luke Wagner, Alon Zakai,
and JF Bastien. 2017. Bringing the Web up to Speed with WebAssembly. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Barcelona, Spain) (PLDI 2017). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 185–200. https://doi.org/10.1145/3062341.3062363
Alex Iliasov. 2003. Templates-Based Portable Just-in-Time Compiler. SIGPLAN Not. 38, 8 (Aug. 2003), 37–43. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/944579.944588
Fredrik Kjolstad, Shoaib Kamil, Stephen Chou, David Lugato, and Saman Amarasinghe. 2017. The tensor algebra compiler.
Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 1, OOPSLA (2017), 1–29.
Petr Kobalicek. 2014. AsmJIT - Machine code generation for C++. AsmJIT. https://github.com/asmjit/asmjit
Marcel Kost. 2018. PelotonDB Interpreter. PostgresSQL. https://github.com/cmu-db/peloton-design/blob/master/bytecode_
interpreter/bytecode_interpreter.md
28
Copy-and-Patch Compilation
Chris Lattner. 2002. LLVM: An Infrastructure for Multi-Stage Optimization. Master’s thesis. Computer Science Dept.,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL. See http://llvm.cs.uiuc.edu.
Nick Lewycky. 2018. Wasmer LLVM backend. Wasmer. https://github.com/wasmerio/wasmer/tree/master/lib/compiler-llvm
LinuxBase. 1998. ARM ELF Relocation types. LinuxBase. https://refspecs.linuxbase.org/elf/ARMELFA08.pdf
Tomofumi Yuki Louis-Noel Pouchet. 2011. PolyBenchC Benchmark. Ohio State University. https://github.com/
MatthiasJReisinger/PolyBenchC-4.2.1
Michael Matz, Jan Hubička, Andreas Jaeger, and Mark Mitchell. 2020. System V Application Binary Interface. LinuxBase.
https://refspecs.linuxbase.org/elf/x86_64-abi-0.98.pdf
MemSQL. 2020a. MemSQL Database. MemSQL. https://www.memsql.com
MemSQL. 2020b. MemSQL Query Code-Generation Documentation. MemSQL. https://docs.memsql.com/v7.1/key-conceptsand-features/query-processing/code-generation/
MemSQL. 2020c. Personal communication, with permission to disclose to the public. MemSQL.
Prashanth Menon, Todd C. Mowry, and Andrew Pavlo. 2017. Relaxed Operator Fusion for In-Memory Databases: Making
Compilation, Vectorization, and Prefetching Work Together At Last. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 11 (September
2017), 1–13. Issue 1. https://doi.org/10.14778/3151113.3151114
Thomas Neumann. 2011. Efficiently compiling efficient query plans for modern hardware. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment 4, 9 (2011), 539–550.
Chris Newland. 2020. JITWatch – Log analyser / visualiser for Java HotSpot JIT compiler. AdoptOpenJDK. https://github.
com/AdoptOpenJDK/jitwatch
Francois Noel, Luke Hornof, Charles Consel, and Julia L Lawall. 1998. Automatic, template-based run-time specialization:
Implementation and experimental study. In Proceedings of the 1998 International Conference on Computer Languages.
IEEE, Chicago, IL, 132–142.
Oracle. 2020a. 64-bit SPARC relocation types. Oracle. https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E23824_01/html/819-0690/chapter6-
54839.html#chapter6-24-1
Oracle. 2020b. The Java HotSpot Performance Engine Architecture. Oracle. https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/
whitepaper.html
Mike Pall. 1999. LuaJIT DynASM. The LuaJIT Project. https://luajit.org/dynasm.html
Andrew Pavlo. 2021. Database of Databases. Carnegie Mellon Database Group. https://dbdb.io/
Andrew Pavlo, Gustavo Angulo, Joy Arulraj, Haibin Lin, Jiexi Lin, Lin Ma, Prashanth Menon, Todd Mowry, Matthew Perron,
Ian Quah, Siddharth Santurkar, Anthony Tomasic, Skye Toor, Dana Van Aken, Ziqi Wang, Yingjun Wu, Ran Xian, and
Tieying Zhang. 2017. Self-Driving Database Management Systems. In Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research.
CIDR, Chaminade, California, 6.
Ian Piumarta and Fabio Riccardi. 1998. Optimizing Direct Threaded Code by Selective Inlining. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGPLAN 1998 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Montreal, Quebec, Canada). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 291–300. https://doi.org/10.1145/277650.277743
PostgresSQL. 2020. Postgres Documentation - Why JIT. PostgresSQL. https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/jit-decision.html
Todd A. Proebsting. 1995. Optimizing an ANSI C interpreter with superoperators. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGPLANSIGACT symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. ACM, San Francisco, California, 322–332.
Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Andrew Adams, Sylvain Paris, Marc Levoy, Saman Amarasinghe, and Frédo Durand. 2012. Decoupling
algorithms from schedules for easy optimization of image processing pipelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 31,
4 (2012), 1–12.
Andrew Scheidecker and Wanming Lin. 2020. WebAssembly Virtual Machine. WAVM. https://github.com/WAVM/WAVM
Ravi Sethi and J. D. Ullman. 1970. The Generation of Optimal Code for Arithmetic Expressions. J. ACM 17, 4 (Oct. 1970),
715–728. https://doi.org/10.1145/321607.321620
Ben Smith. 2018. Clang in WebAssembly. WAPM. https://github.com/wapm-packages/clang
Guy Lewis Steele. 1977. Debunking the “Expensive Procedure Call” Myth or, Procedure Call Implementations Considered
Harmful or, LAMBDA: The Ultimate GOTO. In Proceedings of the 1977 Annual Conference (Seattle, Washington) (ACM
’77). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 153–162. https://doi.org/10.1145/800179.810196
Scott Thibault, Charles Consel, Julia L Lawall, Renaud Marlet, and Gilles Muller. 2000. Static and dynamic program
compilation by interpreter specialization. Higher-Order and Symbolic Computation 13, 3 (2000), 161–178.
TPC. 2020. TPC-H. http://www.tpc.org/tpch/. Accessed: 2020-11-15.
Wikipedia. 2021. Simple Sethi-Ullman Algorithm. Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sethi%E2%80%93Ullman_
algorithm
Christian Wimmer, Michael Haupt, Michael L. Van De Vanter, Mick Jordan, Laurent Daynès, and Douglas Simon. 2013.
Maxine: An Approachable Virtual Machine for, and in, Java. ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim. 9, 4, Article 30 (Jan. 2013),
24 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2400682.2400689
29
H. Xu and F. Kjolstad
Andy Wingo. 2020. firefox’s low-latency webassembly compiler. Mozilla. https://wingolog.org/archives/2020/03/25/firefoxslow-latency-webassembly-compiler
Heyang Zhou. 2018. Wasmer Singlepass Backend. Wasmer. https://github.com/wasmerio/wasmer/tree/master/lib/compilersinglepass
30
